HIGH PERFORMANCE
COMPUTING 101
An Introduction to HPC (Module 1)
Overview
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
What is High Performance Computing?
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
What is High Performance Computing?
● HPC systems are to desktop
  workstations what race cars are to
  commuter vehicles

    ○ both have engines, transmissions and
      4 wheels

    ○ capable of very different performance

    ○ HPC systems are complicated
        ■ exotic hardware = higher cost
        ■ greater effort to maintain
What is High Performance Computing?
● HPC systems are usually shared-use

   ○ Democratized access
   ○ Increased duty-cycle → greater ROI

● IU has long history of research computing resources available at no cost to users

   ○ Not like this everywhere, treat the compute time as valuable (it is)

● Today, research computing systems are typically HPC systems

   ○ UITS Research Technologies is home to IU HPC systems, software and support
Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing
● Motivation for HPC, or “supercomputing,”
  is parallelism

● Idea is that if multiple tasks can be run
  concurrently to solve a problem, the
  solution can be found more quickly          Graph above shows code runtime from left-to-right.
                                              Note that top case runs serially:
● Naively assumes problems can be made        For tasks I, II and III, chunks of work must run from
                                              one to the next, as only one processor is available to
  parallel                                    complete the work.

                                              The lower part shows how sections of code can be
● Generally, a part of any algorithm can be   parallelized, to speed up the runtime within those
  “parallelized”                              parts of the whole workflow. This particular design is
   ○ The remainder must run “serially”        called a fork-join model of parallelism.
Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing
● How one achieves parallelism depends on both hardware
  and code design

● Michael Flynn proposed a 2 x 2 taxonomy to describe
  computing models, separating the instructions
  (code/processing units) and data (input)

          ■   Single-instruction, single-data (SISD)
          ■   Multiple-instruction, single-data (MISD)
          ■   Single-instruction, single-data (SIMD)
          ■   Multiple-instruction, single-data (MIMD)

●   SISD is effectively serial computing

●   SIMD is GPU computing: simple algorithms synchronized on
    vector data

●   MIMD is general supercomputing: arbitrary complexity of tasks
    and data on CPU cores
Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing
● Parallel codes have limits though

   ○ All real parallel codes have serial
     sections

● Runtime for a Parallel Code

   ○ T1 = time to run on one processor

   ○ T = Tserial + Tparallel     code runtime

   ○ Speedup = T1 / T
Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing
● Gene Amdahl showed limitation caused
  by even a tiny fraction of serial work

   ○ Known as Amdahl’s Law

   ○ Very useful analysis to predict
     performance

● The expression S = T1 / T becomes

         S = 1 / [ (1 - fp) + (fp / N)

   where
   ○ fp is the parallel fraction of work
   ○ N is the number of processes
Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing
● Where does this leave us?

   ○ HPC / Supercomputing requires parallel computers and codes

   ○ Should never expect perfect scaling of parallel performance

   ○ Can expect to see a real boost if our workflows are significantly parallel

       ■ Want our runtimes to spend 95–99% of runtime in parallel
   ○ If we’re developing the code, we should look for iterative improvements

       ■ Exploiting parallelism happens by parallelizing performance bottlenecks first
What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?
● Supercomputers are the machines that are behind the term HPC

   ○ Clusters of server nodes

   ○ Each server node typically has one or two multi-core CPUs

   ○ Server nodes have optimized RAM configurations to match core numbers

   ○ Every server node is connected by an “interconnect”

       ■ Low-latency, high-throughput network to allow messaging between tasks and filesystem access

       ■ Frequently, there is a separate maintenance network for general tasks
Supercomputing Architecture

Compute Nodes                                CPU Cores                                    Memory Architecture
Clusters of server-style computer nodes      Dense multi-core CPUs, typically featuring   Massive RAM capacity optimized for high-
intended for massive parallel operation.     two or more processors per server node.      speed parallel access by all cores.




GPUs                                         Parallel Storage                             Low-Latency Interconnect
Hardware accelerators used for many          Storage cluster systems map thousands of     High-speed internal networks enabling
vectorized algorithms to boost throughput.   drives into parallel file systems.           efficient shared intranode communication.
Supercomputers
Big Red 200 is an HPE Cray EX
System
● IU’s Flagship Supercomputer
● 640 nodes of 128 CPU cores & 256 GB
  RAM
● 64 more nodes of 64 CPU cores, 4 NVIDIA
  A100 GPUs & 512 GB RAM
● Theoretical peak performance of roughly
  7 petaFLOPs

    ○ A FLOP is a “floating point operation”
    ○ Peta is a prefix for 1015
Supercomputing Nodes Are Packed!
● Nodes contain CPUs, RAM, NICs, storage,
  power supplies, fans
   ○ and frequently GPUs & liquid cooling

● The “Hopper” queue of the Quartz cluster at
  IU contains Dell XE8640 nodes (shown left)
   ○ Each of 12 nodes contains
      ■ 96 CPU cores                   (upper
         image)
       ■ 512 GB RAM
                  (upper image)
       ■ 4 NVIDIA H100 GPUs (lower image)
       ■ 80 GB VRAM per GPU

● Only a slice of the Quartz system
GPU ACCELERATION




Vectorized Performance via SIMT

Modern supercomputers utilize GPUs as
accelerator peripherals. They require
code to run in unison across large
vectors of data, allowing for massive
degree of parallelism.




                                        NVIDIA H100 GPU
A Look at Storage
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
A Look at Storage
● Supercomputers work by processing data from
  file systems
   ○ Each node needs access to the same file
       system

   ○ File systems must be
        ■   Networked & high-performance
        ■   Capable of very many IOPs for each client

● IU provides 5 file systems, using two software
  stacks
   ○ Lustre-based: Scratch, Slate & Slate Project
   ○ GPFS-based: Geode (Home) & Geode Project
● Each file system here is really a computer
  cluster and arrays (thousands) of storage
  drives
 Storage Infrastructure Comparison

Architecture Metric    Standard Workstation   HPC Supercomputer



Data Access Pattern    Serial / Sequential    Massive High-Bandwidth Parallel



Filesystem Structure   Local OS Managed       Shared Multi-Node Parallel



System Redundancy      Standard RAID          Multi-layer Distributed Redundancy



Storage Pool Scale     Individual Drives      Thousands of Integrated Units
How Supercomputers Are Used
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
From Molecules to the Environment




  GENOMICS & MEDICINE                               3D MAPPING & DESIGN                             SCIENCE & ENGINEERING
3D protein folding simulations to understand      Mapping topographic landscapes to study        Modeling global atmospheric patterns to predict
disease mechanisms and drug interactions.      environmental change and flood risk assessment.     future climate trends and extreme weather.
Types of Parallelism
● Three types of data-parallel workflows

    ○ Embarrassingly parallel
       ■ Zero communication or synchronization
          between tasks
        ■ e.g. frame rendering, Monte Carlo

    ○ Fine-grained parallelism
       ■ Frequent communication between pairs or
           groups of nodes
        ■ e.g. matrix mathematics

    ○ Coarse-grained parallelism
       ■ Irregular communication patterns
       ■ e.g. molecular dynamics
Task Parallelism
● Form of parallelism where tasks are
  grouped by function, run concurrently

        ○ Logic is heterogenous
        ○ Communication patterns complex
        ○ HPC simulations of these systems
        ○ Actual systems distributed with IoT,
          embedded computing

   Autonomous Vehicles
   Perception & Sensor Fusion
   Path Planning Logic
   Thread Team Management
Linux is the Standard OS
 Linux is now the universally chosen OS
 for HPC systems

 Multi-user architecture that supports
 shared resource allocation

 Accessible via CLI and Graphical
 Desktop, as well as application APIs

 Open-source core, community-led, and
 enterprise-supported
Research Desktop Graphical Interface
 Linux supports windowed applications on
 graphical desktops

 IU’s Research Desktop (RED) allows you
 to have virtual desktop on HPC server

 Accessible via web browser and desktop
 client

 Workstation experience you can walk
 away from and come back to
Customized Design
● Computer clusters today fall into broad
  categories
   ○ Defined by intended purpose

   ○ HPC Supercomputing
      ■ tightly synchronized parallelism
      ■ priority: absolute performance
      ■ “racecar” or “quarter horse”

   ○ High Throughput Computing (HTC)
      ■ generalist & multi-function clusters
      ■ priority: maximizing workflow
      ■ “semi truck” or “draft horse”
Picking Your Path With HPC
● What is High Performance Computing?

● Parallelism: The Motivation for Supercomputing

● What are Supercomputers and Who Uses Them?

● A Look at Storage

● How Supercomputers Are Used

● Picking Your Path With HPC
Picking Your Path With HPC
● What sort of problems are you trying to solve?
  ○ Is parallelism already part of your process?

● Are you constrained by a particular application?
  ○ Maintain a “workflow” mindset
  ○ Choose the system that fits each part of that process

● Consider which type of system is best for your work
  ○ Storage systems aren’t tied to a particular cluster
  ○ Frame your workflow around access to your data
  ○ Use the compute resource that fits the task
What about those results?
● The natural endstate of your work should live somewhere

● Beyond presentations and publications, save your work

● Many supercomputing sites have archiving systems
  ○ IU has a system called the Scholarly Data Archive (SDA)
  ○ Massive storage system with multiple redundancies
  ○ Geographically mirrored between Bloomington and Indianapolis

● Archive your project data, codes, scripts, output in SDA
  ○ Clean up disk storage for new projects, other users
Reflection
● Is supercomputing new to you?
   ○ Do you see value in trying it?
   ○ Is this something you’ve used elsewhere?

● Next section focused on using HPC at IU

● Be sure to complete the reflection for this section next
